hey guys what up every few days it seems
somebody poses this question about
veganism and elitism is veganism elitist
in what ways is this a problem and it's
peculiar to me that these are always
posed in terms of cost and luxury and
perhaps the image vegans portray of
themselves on social media or otherwise
and I think that's asking the wrong
question and therefore coming up with
the wrong answers there is another form
of elitism that I think is really worth
considering in reference to veganism
what percentage of Americans were ever
involved with the movement to try to
make seatbelts mandatory in cars this
may seem like a bizarre example but
really it's not in American history you
may or may not be familiar with this
example the automotive industry the big
car companies that were at the time very
powerful corporations with connections
to government and millions of millions
of dollars they did not want to make
seatbelts mandatory and other safety
features and there was a popular
political movement they had lawyers they
had offices they had Civic civil society
organizations who were lobbying
government and giving interviews the
news and carrying on trying to force
these automotive manufacturers to
install seatbelts and a number of other
changes to cards it was a real political
struggle I don't know if even one
percent of Americans were involved with
that struggle definitely not five
percent and I don't even know what
percentage of Americans cared about it
like it did make that the nightly news
every so often that struggle cut but it
brought about real fundamental political
change and really saved a significant
number of lives there's an outcome in
human blood and had other economic and
ethical implications there is there is
an ethical argument that in the United
States you should have the freedom to
buy a car with no seat belts
thatthat's question of political freedom
and that question was answered through a
real political struggle and there is a
very meaningful sense in which that
struggle was carried on by an elite or
elites plural all right it wasn't the
common working man it wasn't the poorest
of the poor wasn't the downtrodden
farmers who rose up and have forced the
automotive companies to install
seatbelts yes I think if you look at the
people involved there's one famous
politician called Ralph Nader who became
famous through that struggle to make
seatbelts mandatory guess what it's an
elite movement and it was completely
effective now I'm not going to repeat
examples I've already used in the
channel like Mothers Against Drunk
Driving and so on these are generally
perceived as positive examples some are
negative you can look at the history of
prohibition in the United States if
you're not from America you may not know
the word prohibition is used to refer to
alcohol being made illegal in the United
States there was a period of history
when alcohol was made illegal that
wasn't just a law in the United States
that was an amendment to the
Constitution the most fundamental form
of political change possible under the
United States political system who did
that was it the poorest of the poor was
it ninety percent of the population was
even five percent of the population an
elite got organized influenced
government and made tremendous sweeping
political change these things happen so
if you ask me is veganism elitist is
there an elitist aspect to veganism I
think the answer is yes but everyone is
looking under the wrong rock the
crucially important elitist aspect of
veganism is precisely the fact that we
do not need to convert a hundred percent
of the population to bring about the
changes were seeking we do
even need to convert fifty percent
actually we can have a huge impact with
just five percent especially if those
five percent are shall we say the right
people okay now what do I mean by the
right people it's shocking and it's
horrifying but yeah there is an elitist
aspect of that I mean the same sort of
people who were capable of organizing a
social movement to try to force car
manufacturers to include safety belts
the same type of people who in the past
got organized and lobbied the government
to have regulations against cigarettes
safety warnings regulations on what
ingredients are in cigarettes because
some ingredients were added to make
cigarettes more addictive etc etc all of
those kinds of things now poor people
can be involved in those movements the
poor and the downtrodden the oppressed
former homeless people like durianrider
can be but yes you know very often those
movements really do rely on that sort of
people who are in a position to employ a
lawyer or people who are lawyers
themselves working pro bono oh it relies
on donors it relies on advocates that's
why we call it advocacy and organizing
and elite like that can be much smaller
than five percent of the population and
in a democracy can have a tremendous
impact on the population now I don't
want this video to go on much longer but
I just mentioned I am a an atheist I'm a
nihilistic atheist but one thing that
influences my thinking in this is
actually my past experience with
Buddhism I was a scholar of tera vaada
Buddhism for many years there are videos
about that I've written many articles
the Internet including studying the
ancient scripture language I was a real
scholar I was not just some hippie who
liked meditation or like yoga or
anything else um in Buddhism one of the
controversies that is both ancient and
modern something you find in the
philosophy but that people still talk
about today you know other religions
like Christianity often attacks Buddhism
criticizes Buddhism by claiming that
Buddhism is elitist and one of the
things that's interesting about tera
vaada Buddhism is that it's different
Christians are very big on saying that
Christianity is for everyone it's got to
save everybody's soul they've got to go
out and preach to people even if people
are severely mentally [ __ ]
Christians will try to get these
mentally [ __ ] people to participate
in the rituals and in some sense believe
in this doctrine so they can be saved
and their souls go to heaven and tear
that a Buddhist whom we don't don't do
that you know tera vaada Buddhism maybe
especially the ancient texts there was a
recognition you know this is a
philosophy and it's not for everybody
and it's not even going to help
everybody and you know what
exceptionally intelligent people
exceptionally educated people and yes
when you're talking about kings and
princes exceptionally powerful people
it's actually more important that they
learn about this philosophy or that they
learn about it first if this philosophy
is going to have a future if it's going
to survive and that is a difference from
religions or social movements that focus
endlessly on the poorest of the poor the
downtrodden or on the masses in some
abstract sense when people talk about
the masses they think they mean
everybody but they usually really mean
nobody they talk about the masses but
they're only talking about the tiny
number of people who show up at
left-wing political events this is the
cartridge that should roll familiar with
in life yes within my lifetime in the
next ten years in the next 20 years
elitism is a factor in veganism and it
is partly a problem we do need to see a
vegan outreach that focuses on helping
the poor but before we can even get to
that we have to be at the level of
having organizations that can help the
poor
and that's where the Christians and the
Buddhists beat the crap out of us there
is no vegan foundation in the world
today that can help the poor or that
actually does and there are hundreds and
thousands of Christian Buddhist even
Muslim charities that really do reach
out and help the poor if you want to
help the poor you first got to be in
that position to help yourself right
it's possible I'll see that within my
lifetime but obviously of people for the
ethical treatment of animals they can't
go out and feed the starving you know
none of the vegan organizations can and
the scale and organization and
credibility and wealth you would need to
have for a vegan organization that it's
worth thinking about maybe it's worth
dreaming about maybe it's worth planning
for maybe we should make it happen but
actually that type of outreach to the
poorest of the poor you want to take
sacks of rice to starving people in
Southeast Asia and Africa and to bring
vegan food to the game of international
humanitarian aid wonderful that's a
wonderful idea but before you get to
that actually you're already dealing
with the kind of elitism I've been
describing because you first need to
form the foundation you first need to do
the fundraising etc etc before you can
start doing that kind of outreach and
aid right advocacy itself involves
elitism of a kind